## File and Archiving Commands

### Arechving

- tar

The standard UNIX archiving utility.Originally a Tape ARchiving program, it has developed into a general purpose package that can handle all manner of archiving with all types of destination devices,ranging from tape drives to regular files to even stdout.

Some useful `tar` options

|options|description|
|:---:|:---|
|-c|create|
|-x|extract|
|--delete|delete(files from existing archive)|
|-z|gzip the archive|
|-j|bzip2 the archive|

### Compression

- gzip

The standard GNU/UNIX compression utility,replacing the inferior and proprietary `compress`.The corresponding decompression command is `gunzip`,which is the equivalent of `gzip -d`.

- bzip2

An alternate compression utility,usually more efficient(but slower) than `gzip`, especially on large files.The corresponding decompression command is `bunzip2`.

- compress, uncompress

This is a older,proprietary compression utility found in commercial UNIX distributions.The more efficient `gzip` has largely replaced it.

- zip, unzip

Cross-platform file archiving and compression utility compatible with DOS `pkzip.exe`.

- unarc, unarj, unrar

These Linux utilities permit unpacking archives compressed with the DOS `arc.exe, arj.exe` and `rar.exe` programs.

- xz, unxz, xzcat

A new high-efficiency compression tool,backward compatible with `lzma`, and with an invocation syntax similar to `gzip`.

### File Information

- file

A utility for identifying file types.The command `file file-name` will return a file specification for file-name, such as `ascii text` or `data`.

The `-f` option causes `file` to run in `batch` mode,to read from a designated file a list of filenames to analyze.

- which

`which` command gives the full path to "command". This is useful for finding out whether a particular command or utility is installed on the system.

- whereis

Similar to `which`, above, `whereis` command gives the full path to "command", but also to its manpage.

- readlink

Disclose the file that a synbolic link points to.

### Comparison

- diff

Flexible file comparison utility.It compares the target files line by line sequentially.

**Note**:

The `diff` command returns an exit status of 0 if the compared files are identical, and 1 if they are differ(or 2 when binary files are being compared)

- patch

Flexible version utility.Given a difference file generated by diff, patch can upgrade a previous version of a package to a newer version. 

### Utilities

- basename

Scripts the path information from a file name,printing pnly the file name.The construction `basename $0` lets the script know its name,that is, the name it was invoked by.This can be used for "usage" message if, for example a script is called with missing arguments:

```shell
echo "Usage: `basename $0` arg1 arg2 ... argn"
```

- dirname

Scripts the `basename` from a filename,printing only the path information.

- split,csplit

These are utilities for spliting a file into smaller chunks.Their usual use is for spliting up large files in order to back them up on preparatory to e-mailing or uploading them.

### Encoding and Encryption

- sum,cksum,md5sum,sha1sum

These are utilities for generating `checksums`, A `checksums` is a number mathematically calculated from the content of a file,for the purpose of checking its integrity.A script might refer a list of checknums for security purpose, such as ensuring that the contents of key system files have not been altered or corrupted.For security applications,use the `md5sum`(message digest 5 chencksum) command,or better yet, the newer `sha1sum`(Secure Hash Algorithm).

